docs/src/security.md, before:

# Security

This section contains information about security for CloudNativePG,
that are analyzed at 3 different layers: Code, Container and Cluster.

!!! Warning
    The information contained in this page must not exonerate you from
    performing regular InfoSec duties on your Kubernetes cluster. Please
    familiarize yourself with the ["Overview of Cloud Native Security"](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/overview/)
    page from the Kubernetes documentation.

!!! Seealso "About the 4C's Security Model"
    Please refer to ["The 4C’s Security Model in Kubernetes"](https://www.enterprisedb.com/blog/4cs-security-model-kubernetes)
    blog article to get a better understanding and context of the approach EDB
    has taken with security in CloudNativePG.

## Code

Source code of CloudNativePG is *systematically scanned* for static analysis purposes,
including **security problems**, using a popular open-source linter for Go called
[GolangCI-Lint](https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint) directly in the CI/CD pipeline.
GolangCI-Lint can run several *linters* on the same source code.

One of these is [Golang Security Checker](https://github.com/securego/gosec), or simply `gosec`,
a linter that scans the abstract syntactic tree of the source against a set of rules aimed at
the discovery of well-known vulnerabilities, threats, and weaknesses hidden in
the code such as hard-coded credentials, integer overflows and SQL injections - to name a few.

!!! Important
    A failure in the static code analysis phase of the CI/CD pipeline is a blocker
    for the entire delivery of CloudNativePG, meaning that each commit is validated
    against all the linters defined by GolangCI-Lint.

## Container

Every container image that is part of CloudNativePG is automatically built via CI/CD pipelines following every commit.
Such images include not only the operator's, but also the operands' - specifically every supported PostgreSQL version.
Within the pipelines, images are scanned with:

- [Dockle](https://github.com/goodwithtech/dockle): for best practices in terms
  of the container build process

!!! Important
    All operand images are automatically rebuilt once a day by our pipelines in case
    of security updates at the base image and package level, providing **patch level updates**
    for the container images that EDB distributes.

The following guidelines and frameworks have been taken into account for container-level security:

- the ["Container Image Creation and Deployment Guide"](https://dl.dod.cyber.mil/wp-content/uploads/devsecops/pdf/DevSecOps_Enterprise_Container_Image_Creation_and_Deployment_Guide_2.6-Public-Release.pdf),
  developed by the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) of the United States Department of Defense (DoD)
- the ["CIS Benchmark for Docker"](https://www.cisecurity.org/benchmark/docker/),
  developed by the Center for Internet Security (CIS)

!!! Seealso "About the Container level security"
    Please refer to ["Security and Containers in CloudNativePG"](https://www.enterprisedb.com/blog/security-and-containers-cloud-native-postgresql)
    blog article for more information about the approach that EDB has taken on
    security at the container level in CloudNativePG.

## Cluster

Security at the cluster level takes into account all Kubernetes components that
form both the control plane and the nodes, as well as the applications that run in
the cluster (PostgreSQL included).

### Role Based Access Control (RBAC)

The operator interacts with the Kubernetes API server with a dedicated service
account called `cnpg-manager`. In Kubernetes this is installed
by default in the `cnpg-system` namespace, with a cluster role
binding between this service account and the `cnpg-manager`
cluster role which defines the set of rules/resources/verbs granted to the operator.

!!! Important
    The above permissions are exclusively reserved for the operator's service
    account to interact with the Kubernetes API server.  They are not directly
    accessible by the users of the operator that interact only with `Cluster`,
    `Pooler`, `Backup`, and `ScheduledBackup` resources.

Below we provide some examples and, most importantly, the reasons why
CloudNativePG requires full or partial management of standard Kubernetes
namespaced resources.

`configmaps`
: The operator needs to create and manage default config maps for
  the Prometheus exporter monitoring metrics.

`deployments`
: The operator needs to manage a PgBouncer connection pooler
  using a standard Kubernetes `Deployment` resource.

`jobs`
: The operator needs to handle jobs to manage different `Cluster`'s phases.

`persistentvolumeclaims`
: The volume where the `PGDATA` resides is the
  central element of a PostgreSQL `Cluster` resource; the operator needs
  to interact with the selected storage class to dynamically provision
  the requested volumes, based on the defined scheduling policies.

`pods`
: The operator needs to manage `Cluster`'s instances.

`secrets`
: Unless you provide certificates and passwords to your `Cluster`
  objects, the operator adopts the "convention over configuration" paradigm by
  self-provisioning random generated passwords and TLS certificates, and by
  storing them in secrets.

`serviceaccounts`
: The operator needs to create a service account that
  enables the instance manager (which is the *PID 1* process of the container
  that controls the PostgreSQL server) to safely communicate with the
  Kubernetes API server to coordinate actions and continuously provide
  a reliable status of the `Cluster`.

`services`
: The operator needs to control network access to the PostgreSQL cluster
  (or the connection pooler) from applications, and properly manage
  failover/switchover operations in an automated way (by assigning, for example,
  the correct end-point of a service to the proper primary PostgreSQL instance).

`validatingwebhookconfigurations` and `mutatingwebhookconfigurations`
: The operator injects its self-signed webhook CA into both webhook
  configurations, which are needed to validate and mutate all the resources it
  manages. For more details, please see the
  [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/).

`nodes`
: The operator needs to get the labels for Affinity and AntiAffinity, so it can
  decide in which nodes a pod can be scheduled preventing the replicas to be
  in the same node, specially if nodes are in different availability zones. This
  permission is also used to determine if a node is schedule or not, avoiding
  the creation of pods that cannot be created at all.

To see all the permissions required by the operator, you can run `kubectl
describe clusterrole cnpg-manager`.

### Calls to the API server made by the instance manager

The instance manager, which is the entry point of the operand container, needs
to make some calls to the Kubernetes API server to ensure that the status of
some resources is correctly updated and to access the config maps and secrets
that are associated with that Postgres cluster. Such calls are performed through
a dedicated `ServiceAccount` created by the operator that shares the same
PostgreSQL `Cluster` resource name.

!!! Important
    The operand can only access a specific and limited subset of resources
    through the API server. A service account is the
    [recommended way to access the API server from within a Pod](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/access-api-from-pod/).

For transparency, the permissions associated with the service account are defined in the
[roles.go](https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/cloudnative-pg/blob/main/pkg/specs/roles.go)
file. For example, to retrieve the permissions of a generic `mypg` cluster in the
`myns` namespace, you can type the following command:

```bash
kubectl get role -n myns mypg -o yaml
```

Then verify that the role is bound to the service account:

```bash
kubectl get rolebinding -n myns mypg -o yaml
```

!!! Important
    Remember that **roles are limited to a given namespace**.

Below we provide a quick summary of the permissions associated with the service
account for generic Kubernetes resources.

`configmaps`
: The instance manager can only read config maps that are related to the same
  cluster, such as custom monitoring queries

`secrets`
: The instance manager can only read secrets that are related to the same
  cluster, namely: streaming replication user, application user, super user,
  LDAP authentication user, client CA, server CA, server certificate, backup
  credentials, custom monitoring queries

`events`
: The instance manager can create an event for the cluster, informing the
  API server about a particular aspect of the PostgreSQL instance lifecycle

Here instead, we provide the same summary for resources specific to
CloudNativePG.

`clusters`
: The instance manager requires read-only permissions, namely `get`, `list` and
  `watch`, just for its own `Cluster` resource

`clusters/status`
: The instance manager requires to `update` and `patch` the status of just its
  own `Cluster` resource

`backups`
: The instance manager requires `get` and `list` permissions to read any
  `Backup` resource in the namespace. Additionally, it requires the `delete`
  permission to clean up the Kubernetes cluster by removing the `Backup` objects
  that do not have a counterpart in the object store - typically because of
  retention policies

`backups/status`
: The instance manager requires to `update` and `patch` the status of any
  `Backup` resource in the namespace

### Pod Security Policies

A [Pod Security Policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/pod-security-policy/)
is the Kubernetes way to define security rules and specifications that a pod needs to meet
to run in a cluster.
For InfoSec reasons, every Kubernetes platform should implement them.

CloudNativePG does not require *privileged* mode for containers execution.
The PostgreSQL containers run as `postgres` system user. No component whatsoever requires running as `root`.

Likewise, Volumes access does not require *privileges* mode or `root` privileges either.
Proper permissions must be properly assigned by the Kubernetes platform and/or administrators.
The PostgreSQL containers run with a read-only root filesystem (i.e. no writable layer).

The operator explicitly sets the required security contexts.

### Restricting Pod access using AppArmor

You can assign an
[AppArmor](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tutorials/security/apparmor/) profile to
the `postgres`, `initdb`, `join`, `full-recovery` and `bootstrap-controller` containers inside every `Cluster` pod through the
`container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io` annotation.

!!! Seealso "Example of cluster annotations"
```
	kind: Cluster
	metadata:
		name: cluster-apparmor
		annotations:
			container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io/postgres: runtime/default
			container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io/initdb: runtime/default
			container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io/join: runtime/default
```

!!! Warning
    Using this kind of annotations can result in your cluster to stop working.
    If this is the case, the annotation can be safely removed from the `Cluster`.

The AppArmor configuration must be at Kubernetes node level, meaning that the
underlying operating system must have this option enable and properly
configured.

In case this is not the situation, and the annotations were added at the
`Cluster` creation time, pods will not be created. On the other hand, if you
add the annotations after the `Cluster` was created the pods in the cluster will
be unable to start and you will get an error like this:

```
metadata.annotations[container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io/postgres]: Forbidden: may not add AppArmor annotations]
```

In such cases, please refer to your Kubernetes administrators and ask for the
proper AppArmor profile to use.

### Network Policies

The pods created by the `Cluster` resource can be controlled by Kubernetes
[network policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/)
to enable/disable inbound and outbound network access at IP and TCP level.
You can find more information in the [networking document](networking.md).

!!! Important
    The operator needs to communicate to each instance on TCP port 8000
    to get information about the status of the PostgreSQL server. Please
    make sure you keep this in mind in case you add any network policy,
    and refer to the "Exposed Ports" section below for a list of ports used by
    CloudNativePG for finer control.

Network policies are beyond the scope of this document.
Please refer to the ["Network policies"](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/)
section of the Kubernetes documentation for further information.

#### Exposed Ports

CloudNativePG exposes ports at operator, instance manager and operand
levels, as listed in the table below:

System           | Port number  | Exposing            |  Name               |  Certificates  |  Authentication
:--------------- | :----------- | :------------------ | :------------------ | :------------  | :--------------
operator         | 9443         | webhook server      | `webhook-server`    |  TLS           | Yes
operator         | 8080         | metrics             | `metrics`           |  no TLS        | No
instance manager | 9187         | metrics             | `metrics`           |  no TLS        | No
instance manager | 8000         | status              | `status`            |  no TLS        | No
operand          | 5432         | PostgreSQL instance | `postgresql`        |  optional TLS  | Yes

### PostgreSQL

The current implementation of CloudNativePG automatically creates
passwords and `.pgpass` files for the `postgres` superuser and the database owner.

As far as encryption of password is concerned, CloudNativePG follows
the default behavior of PostgreSQL: starting from PostgreSQL 14,
`password_encryption` is by default set to `scram-sha-256`, while on earlier
versions it is set to `md5`.

!!! Important
    Please refer to the ["Password authentication"](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-password.html)
    section in the PostgreSQL documentation for details.

You can disable management of the `postgres` user password via secrets by setting
`enableSuperuserAccess` to `false`.

!!! Note
    The operator supports toggling the `enableSuperuserAccess` option. When you
    disable it on a running cluster, the operator will ignore the content of the secret,
    remove it (if previously generated by the operator) and set the password of the
    `postgres` user to `NULL` (de facto disabling remote access through password authentication).

See the ["Secrets" section in the "Connecting from an application" page](applications.md#secrets) for more information.

You can use those files to configure application access to the database.

By default, every replica is automatically configured to connect in **physical
async streaming replication** with the current primary instance, with a special
user called `streaming_replica`. The connection between nodes is **encrypted**
and authentication is via **TLS client certificates** (please refer to the
["Client TLS/SSL Connections"](ssl_connections.md#"Client TLS/SSL Connections") page
for details).

Currently, the operator allows administrators to add `pg_hba.conf` lines directly in the manifest
as part of the `pg_hba` section of the `postgresql` configuration. The lines defined in the
manifest are added to a default `pg_hba.conf`.

For further detail on how `pg_hba.conf` is managed by the operator, see the
["PostgreSQL Configuration" page](postgresql_conf.md#the-pg_hba-section) of the documentation.

!!! Important
    Examples assume that the Kubernetes cluster runs in a private and secure network.

### Storage

CloudNativePG delegates encryption at rest to the underlying storage class. For
data protection in production environments, we highly recommend that you choose
a storage class that supports encryption at rest.

Commit message:

feat: disable `postgres` super user access by default
IMPORTANT: Change the default value of `.spec.enableSuperuserAccess` to
`false`, in order improve the security-by-default posture of CloudNativePG by
disabling superuser access via the network.

The rationale behind this is to foster a microservice approach where changes to
PostgreSQL are performed in a declarative way through the `spec` of the
`Cluster` resource, while providing developers with full powers inside the
database through the database owner user. At the same time, give
the possibility to users to enable it by explicitly setting
`.spec.enableSuperuserAccess: true`.

Closes #2899

Signed-off-by: Gabriele Bartolini <gabriele.bartolini@enterprisedb.com>

docs/src/security.md, after:

# Security

This section contains information about security for CloudNativePG,
that are analyzed at 3 different layers: Code, Container and Cluster.

!!! Warning
    The information contained in this page must not exonerate you from
    performing regular InfoSec duties on your Kubernetes cluster. Please
    familiarize yourself with the ["Overview of Cloud Native Security"](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/overview/)
    page from the Kubernetes documentation.

!!! Seealso "About the 4C's Security Model"
    Please refer to ["The 4C’s Security Model in Kubernetes"](https://www.enterprisedb.com/blog/4cs-security-model-kubernetes)
    blog article to get a better understanding and context of the approach EDB
    has taken with security in CloudNativePG.

## Code

Source code of CloudNativePG is *systematically scanned* for static analysis purposes,
including **security problems**, using a popular open-source linter for Go called
[GolangCI-Lint](https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint) directly in the CI/CD pipeline.
GolangCI-Lint can run several *linters* on the same source code.

One of these is [Golang Security Checker](https://github.com/securego/gosec), or simply `gosec`,
a linter that scans the abstract syntactic tree of the source against a set of rules aimed at
the discovery of well-known vulnerabilities, threats, and weaknesses hidden in
the code such as hard-coded credentials, integer overflows and SQL injections - to name a few.

!!! Important
    A failure in the static code analysis phase of the CI/CD pipeline is a blocker
    for the entire delivery of CloudNativePG, meaning that each commit is validated
    against all the linters defined by GolangCI-Lint.

## Container

Every container image that is part of CloudNativePG is automatically built via CI/CD pipelines following every commit.
Such images include not only the operator's, but also the operands' - specifically every supported PostgreSQL version.
Within the pipelines, images are scanned with:

- [Dockle](https://github.com/goodwithtech/dockle): for best practices in terms
  of the container build process

!!! Important
    All operand images are automatically rebuilt once a day by our pipelines in case
    of security updates at the base image and package level, providing **patch level updates**
    for the container images that EDB distributes.

The following guidelines and frameworks have been taken into account for container-level security:

- the ["Container Image Creation and Deployment Guide"](https://dl.dod.cyber.mil/wp-content/uploads/devsecops/pdf/DevSecOps_Enterprise_Container_Image_Creation_and_Deployment_Guide_2.6-Public-Release.pdf),
  developed by the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) of the United States Department of Defense (DoD)
- the ["CIS Benchmark for Docker"](https://www.cisecurity.org/benchmark/docker/),
  developed by the Center for Internet Security (CIS)

!!! Seealso "About the Container level security"
    Please refer to ["Security and Containers in CloudNativePG"](https://www.enterprisedb.com/blog/security-and-containers-cloud-native-postgresql)
    blog article for more information about the approach that EDB has taken on
    security at the container level in CloudNativePG.

## Cluster

Security at the cluster level takes into account all Kubernetes components that
form both the control plane and the nodes, as well as the applications that run in
the cluster (PostgreSQL included).

### Role Based Access Control (RBAC)

The operator interacts with the Kubernetes API server with a dedicated service
account called `cnpg-manager`. In Kubernetes this is installed
by default in the `cnpg-system` namespace, with a cluster role
binding between this service account and the `cnpg-manager`
cluster role which defines the set of rules/resources/verbs granted to the operator.

!!! Important
    The above permissions are exclusively reserved for the operator's service
    account to interact with the Kubernetes API server.  They are not directly
    accessible by the users of the operator that interact only with `Cluster`,
    `Pooler`, `Backup`, and `ScheduledBackup` resources.

Below we provide some examples and, most importantly, the reasons why
CloudNativePG requires full or partial management of standard Kubernetes
namespaced resources.

`configmaps`
: The operator needs to create and manage default config maps for
  the Prometheus exporter monitoring metrics.

`deployments`
: The operator needs to manage a PgBouncer connection pooler
  using a standard Kubernetes `Deployment` resource.

`jobs`
: The operator needs to handle jobs to manage different `Cluster`'s phases.

`persistentvolumeclaims`
: The volume where the `PGDATA` resides is the
  central element of a PostgreSQL `Cluster` resource; the operator needs
  to interact with the selected storage class to dynamically provision
  the requested volumes, based on the defined scheduling policies.

`pods`
: The operator needs to manage `Cluster`'s instances.

`secrets`
: Unless you provide certificates and passwords to your `Cluster`
  objects, the operator adopts the "convention over configuration" paradigm by
  self-provisioning random generated passwords and TLS certificates, and by
  storing them in secrets.

`serviceaccounts`
: The operator needs to create a service account that
  enables the instance manager (which is the *PID 1* process of the container
  that controls the PostgreSQL server) to safely communicate with the
  Kubernetes API server to coordinate actions and continuously provide
  a reliable status of the `Cluster`.

`services`
: The operator needs to control network access to the PostgreSQL cluster
  (or the connection pooler) from applications, and properly manage
  failover/switchover operations in an automated way (by assigning, for example,
  the correct end-point of a service to the proper primary PostgreSQL instance).

`validatingwebhookconfigurations` and `mutatingwebhookconfigurations`
: The operator injects its self-signed webhook CA into both webhook
  configurations, which are needed to validate and mutate all the resources it
  manages. For more details, please see the
  [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/).

`nodes`
: The operator needs to get the labels for Affinity and AntiAffinity, so it can
  decide in which nodes a pod can be scheduled preventing the replicas to be
  in the same node, specially if nodes are in different availability zones. This
  permission is also used to determine if a node is schedule or not, avoiding
  the creation of pods that cannot be created at all.

To see all the permissions required by the operator, you can run `kubectl
describe clusterrole cnpg-manager`.

### Calls to the API server made by the instance manager

The instance manager, which is the entry point of the operand container, needs
to make some calls to the Kubernetes API server to ensure that the status of
some resources is correctly updated and to access the config maps and secrets
that are associated with that Postgres cluster. Such calls are performed through
a dedicated `ServiceAccount` created by the operator that shares the same
PostgreSQL `Cluster` resource name.

!!! Important
    The operand can only access a specific and limited subset of resources
    through the API server. A service account is the
    [recommended way to access the API server from within a Pod](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/access-api-from-pod/).

For transparency, the permissions associated with the service account are defined in the
[roles.go](https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/cloudnative-pg/blob/main/pkg/specs/roles.go)
file. For example, to retrieve the permissions of a generic `mypg` cluster in the
`myns` namespace, you can type the following command:

```bash
kubectl get role -n myns mypg -o yaml
```

Then verify that the role is bound to the service account:

```bash
kubectl get rolebinding -n myns mypg -o yaml
```

!!! Important
    Remember that **roles are limited to a given namespace**.

Below we provide a quick summary of the permissions associated with the service
account for generic Kubernetes resources.

`configmaps`
: The instance manager can only read config maps that are related to the same
  cluster, such as custom monitoring queries

`secrets`
: The instance manager can only read secrets that are related to the same
  cluster, namely: streaming replication user, application user, super user,
  LDAP authentication user, client CA, server CA, server certificate, backup
  credentials, custom monitoring queries

`events`
: The instance manager can create an event for the cluster, informing the
  API server about a particular aspect of the PostgreSQL instance lifecycle

Here instead, we provide the same summary for resources specific to
CloudNativePG.

`clusters`
: The instance manager requires read-only permissions, namely `get`, `list` and
  `watch`, just for its own `Cluster` resource

`clusters/status`
: The instance manager requires to `update` and `patch` the status of just its
  own `Cluster` resource

`backups`
: The instance manager requires `get` and `list` permissions to read any
  `Backup` resource in the namespace. Additionally, it requires the `delete`
  permission to clean up the Kubernetes cluster by removing the `Backup` objects
  that do not have a counterpart in the object store - typically because of
  retention policies

`backups/status`
: The instance manager requires to `update` and `patch` the status of any
  `Backup` resource in the namespace

### Pod Security Policies

A [Pod Security Policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/pod-security-policy/)
is the Kubernetes way to define security rules and specifications that a pod needs to meet
to run in a cluster.
For InfoSec reasons, every Kubernetes platform should implement them.

CloudNativePG does not require *privileged* mode for containers execution.
The PostgreSQL containers run as `postgres` system user. No component whatsoever requires running as `root`.

Likewise, Volumes access does not require *privileges* mode or `root` privileges either.
Proper permissions must be properly assigned by the Kubernetes platform and/or administrators.
The PostgreSQL containers run with a read-only root filesystem (i.e. no writable layer).

The operator explicitly sets the required security contexts.

### Restricting Pod access using AppArmor

You can assign an
[AppArmor](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tutorials/security/apparmor/) profile to
the `postgres`, `initdb`, `join`, `full-recovery` and `bootstrap-controller` containers inside every `Cluster` pod through the
`container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io` annotation.

!!! Seealso "Example of cluster annotations"
```
	kind: Cluster
	metadata:
		name: cluster-apparmor
		annotations:
			container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io/postgres: runtime/default
			container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io/initdb: runtime/default
			container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io/join: runtime/default
```

!!! Warning
    Using this kind of annotations can result in your cluster to stop working.
    If this is the case, the annotation can be safely removed from the `Cluster`.

The AppArmor configuration must be at Kubernetes node level, meaning that the
underlying operating system must have this option enable and properly
configured.

In case this is not the situation, and the annotations were added at the
`Cluster` creation time, pods will not be created. On the other hand, if you
add the annotations after the `Cluster` was created the pods in the cluster will
be unable to start and you will get an error like this:

```
metadata.annotations[container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io/postgres]: Forbidden: may not add AppArmor annotations]
```

In such cases, please refer to your Kubernetes administrators and ask for the
proper AppArmor profile to use.

### Network Policies

The pods created by the `Cluster` resource can be controlled by Kubernetes
[network policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/)
to enable/disable inbound and outbound network access at IP and TCP level.
You can find more information in the [networking document](networking.md).

!!! Important
    The operator needs to communicate to each instance on TCP port 8000
    to get information about the status of the PostgreSQL server. Please
    make sure you keep this in mind in case you add any network policy,
    and refer to the "Exposed Ports" section below for a list of ports used by
    CloudNativePG for finer control.

Network policies are beyond the scope of this document.
Please refer to the ["Network policies"](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/)
section of the Kubernetes documentation for further information.

#### Exposed Ports

CloudNativePG exposes ports at operator, instance manager and operand
levels, as listed in the table below:

System           | Port number  | Exposing            |  Name               |  Certificates  |  Authentication
:--------------- | :----------- | :------------------ | :------------------ | :------------  | :--------------
operator         | 9443         | webhook server      | `webhook-server`    |  TLS           | Yes
operator         | 8080         | metrics             | `metrics`           |  no TLS        | No
instance manager | 9187         | metrics             | `metrics`           |  no TLS        | No
instance manager | 8000         | status              | `status`            |  no TLS        | No
operand          | 5432         | PostgreSQL instance | `postgresql`        |  optional TLS  | Yes

### PostgreSQL

The current implementation of CloudNativePG automatically creates
passwords and `.pgpass` files for the the database owner and, only
if requested by setting `enableSuperuserAccess` to `true`, for the
`postgres` superuser.

!!! Warning
    Prior to CloudNativePG 1.21, `enableSuperuserAccess` was set to `true` by
    default. This change has been implemented to improve the security-by-default
    posture of the operator, fostering a microservice approach where changes to
    PostgreSQL are performed in a declarative way through the `spec` of the
    `Cluster` resource, while providing developers with full powers inside the
    database through the database owner user.

As far as password encryption is concerned, CloudNativePG follows
the default behavior of PostgreSQL: starting from PostgreSQL 14,
`password_encryption` is by default set to `scram-sha-256`, while on earlier
versions it is set to `md5`.

!!! Important
    Please refer to the ["Password authentication"](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-password.html)
    section in the PostgreSQL documentation for details.

!!! Note
    The operator supports toggling the `enableSuperuserAccess` option. When you
    disable it on a running cluster, the operator will ignore the content of the secret,
    remove it (if previously generated by the operator) and set the password of the
    `postgres` user to `NULL` (de facto disabling remote access through password authentication).

See the ["Secrets" section in the "Connecting from an application" page](applications.md#secrets) for more information.

You can use those files to configure application access to the database.

By default, every replica is automatically configured to connect in **physical
async streaming replication** with the current primary instance, with a special
user called `streaming_replica`. The connection between nodes is **encrypted**
and authentication is via **TLS client certificates** (please refer to the
["Client TLS/SSL Connections"](ssl_connections.md#"Client TLS/SSL Connections") page
for details).

Currently, the operator allows administrators to add `pg_hba.conf` lines directly in the manifest
as part of the `pg_hba` section of the `postgresql` configuration. The lines defined in the
manifest are added to a default `pg_hba.conf`.

For further detail on how `pg_hba.conf` is managed by the operator, see the
["PostgreSQL Configuration" page](postgresql_conf.md#the-pg_hba-section) of the documentation.

!!! Important
    Examples assume that the Kubernetes cluster runs in a private and secure network.

### Storage

CloudNativePG delegates encryption at rest to the underlying storage class. For
data protection in production environments, we highly recommend that you choose
a storage class that supports encryption at rest.
